# Missional AI

This repository contains Jupyter notebooks showing how to use [MACULA
Greek New Testament](https://github.com/Clear-Bible/macula-greek)
data. These notebooks were prepared for a tutorial at the 2023 [Global
Missional AI Summit](https://missional.ai/) on "Greek and Hebrew
Datasets for Natural Language Processing". The tutorial was led by
Jonathan Robie, Sean Boisen, and Randall Tan of [Clear Bible,
Inc](https://www.clear.bible/).

## Tutorial Abstract

The original Greek and Hebrew texts are at the heart of Bible
translation, and they have been analyzed by many different researchers
in every conceivable way. But most NLP practitioners do not know
Hebrew or Greek. MACULA is a set of linguistic datasets that describe
the original Hebrew and Greek texts that are at the heart of Bible
translation.

Using English glosses, semantic domains, and various descriptions of
the text, they can be used by NLP practitioners without knowledge of
the original languages. These datasets were developed by Clear Bible,
United Bible Societies, SIL International, unfoldingWord, Translatable
Exegetical Tools, Faith Comes by Hearing, the Groves Center,
OpenScriptures, Cherith Analytics, and others, and they have been
integrated to work together.

In this workshop, we will use Google Colab notebooks to show how to
use this data for specific tasks, then demonstrate some useful NLP
tasks such as exploratory data analysis, topic modeling, identifying
important vocabulary in a passage using tf-idf, and text summarie.

Participants will be encouraged to work at their own pace and ask
questions.  They are also welcome to work on their own projects using
this data, or build on the notebooks we present.

## Acknowledgements

The notebooks were created by [Ryder
Wishart](https://github.com/ryderwishart) and Nathan Brock.
